---
layout: post
title: "Differentiable simulation in Python"
date: 2023-06-16T03:00:30-04:00
categories:
  - blog
tags:
  - physics
  - python
  - autodiff
---

Differentiable simulation is a topic that has been attracting more and more attention in recent years - and rightly so, in my opinion.  More and more engineering challenges can be viewed as large-scale optimization problems constrained by physics models, and differentiable simulation a useful tool for solving these types of problems.  This idea probably first originated in the world of optimal control (trajectory optimization), but it's also now applied to problems in design optimization, parameter estimation, data assimilation, surrogate modeling, and neural ODEs.  As a result, more and more simulation libraries are building in differentiation capabilities.  In no particular order, a few examples are Brax, Drake, Firedrake, CasADi, DifferentialEquations.jl, and by extension MTK.

But despite its growing relevance, I haven't seen many simple demonstrations of how this is actually done.
So that's what I'm going to try to do in this post.
Starting from (almost) scratch, I'll build up to a simple implementation of one of the basic ideas in differentiable simulation: the adjoint sensitivity equations.
At the end we'll have a differentiable version of SciPy's `solve_ivp` function, and use it to solve some simple optimization problems.

You are going to need some calculus to follow that particular derivation, but I'll try to keep it to a minimum.  I'll also assume that we have basic automatic differentiation available - in particular, I'm going to build off my fork of Andrej Karpathy's [micrograd](https://github.com/karpathy/micrograd).  If you're not familiar with backpropagation/reverse-mode automatic differentiation, I highly recommend watching the [micrograd YouTube video](https://youtu.be/VMj-3S1tku0).

__Outline:__

1.  What differentiable simulation "is" in terms of how you use it
2.  A naive implementation: differentiation through the solver
3.  The adjoint sensitivity equations
4.  Implementation based on `micrograd` and `scipy`
5.  Examples

### 1.  What is differentiable simulation?

